In 1999, in an unnamed city, Thomas Anderson, a computer programmer known as "Neo" in hacking circles, delves into the mystery of the "Matrix". His search brings him to the attention of hacker Trinity, who discloses that the enigmatic Morpheus can answer Neo's questions. At his workplace, Neo is pursued by police and Agents led by Agent Smith. Morpheus guides Neo's escape by phone, able to somehow remotely observe their movements, but Neo ultimately surrenders rather than risk a hazardous getaway.

The Agents interrogate Neo about Morpheus but he refuses to cooperate. In response, Neo's mouth suddenly seals shut and the Agents implant a robotic device in his abdomen. Neo awakens at home, initially dismissing the encounter as a nightmare until Trinity and her allies arrive, extract the implanted tracker, and bring Neo to Morpheus, their leader. Morpheus offers Neo a choice: a red pill to uncover the truth about the Matrix or a blue pill to forget everything and return to his normal life. Opting for the red pill, Neo's reality distorts, and he awakens submerged in a mechanical pod with invasive cables running throughout his body. Neo witnesses countless inert humans similarly encased and tended to by machines before he is ejected from the facility and rescued by Morpheus aboard the hovercraft, the Nebuchadnezzar.

Morpheus reveals that the year is approximately 2199. In the 21st century, humanity lost a war with their artificially intelligent creations, leaving the Earth a devastated ruin. As a last resort, humans blackened the sky to eliminate the machines' access to solar power and, in response, the machines developed farms of artificially grown humans to harness their bioelectric energy. The Matrix is a simulated reality based on human civilization at its peak, designed to keep the subjugated humans oblivious and pacified. The remaining free humans established an underground refuge known as Zion, living a harsh existence on scarce resources. Morpheus and his rebel crew hack into the Matrix to free others and recruit them, manipulating the rules of the simulation to gain superhuman physical abilities. Even so, they are outmatched by the overwhelmingly powerful Agents—sentient programs protecting the Matrix—and dying in the Matrix causes death in the real world. Morpheus liberated Neo because he believes him to be "the One", a prophesied figure destined to dismantle the Matrix and liberate humanity.

The crew enter the Matrix to seek guidance from the Oracle, the prophetic figure who foretold the existence of the One. She implies that Neo is not the One and warns him of an imminent choice between his life and Morpheus's. The crew are ambushed by Agents after being betrayed by Cypher, a resentful crew member who wants to be reinserted into the Matrix to enjoy its comforts. Convinced of Neo's importance, Morpheus sacrifices himself to confront Smith, only to be overpowered and captured. Meanwhile, Cypher exits the Matrix and begins forcefully disconnecting the others, killing them. Before Cypher can kill Neo and Trinity, Tank, a subdued crew member, regains consciousness, kills Cypher, and safely extracts the survivors.

Smith interrogates Morpheus to obtain access codes for Zion's mainframe, which will allow them to end the human resistance. Determined to rescue Morpheus, Neo re-enters the Matrix with Trinity. They successfully free Morpheus, who escapes the Matrix with Trinity, but Smith intercepts Neo. Gaining confidence in his abilities, Neo fights Smith, demonstrating comparable power and eventually killing him. However, Smith resurrects in a new body and kills Neo.

In the real world, machines called Sentinels attack the Nebuchadnezzar. Standing by Neo's real body, Trinity confesses her love for him and that the Oracle prophesied she would fall in love with the One. In the Matrix, Neo revives with newfound abilities to perceive and control the Matrix. He effortlessly destroys Smith and exits the Matrix just as the Nebuchadnezzar's electromagnetic pulse disables the ship's power and the Sentinels. Sometime later, within the Matrix, Neo communicates with the system, promising to show the enslaved humans a world of limitless possibilities, before flying away.